764] TO JODOCUS BADIUS 203

habeo, letus laudari a viro laudato ; curaboque pro virili respondere
officio. Aemylii Historiam tandem huc allatam esse gaudeo. Ceterum
Linacrica non prodire demiror. Rogarem Lupsetum vt vnum volumen
ad me mittoret5 verum is, vt apparet, Britannica egit fide. Rogo
mittas denuo qui Litteras exigat a Budeo ae Deloixlo. Bene vale,
humanissime Badi, cum tuis omnibus.

Louansu· Anno lim). 18. ¹7 Cal. febr.

765. To EDWARD Lan.

Deventer MS. 91, f. 83. (Louvain.>
LE. App. 238. <c- January 1518.)

[A date may be assigned conjecturally froin the close i-esemhlsnce to Epp. 7⁵6,
778, in the passage about noers book ; especially to Ep. 7⁵⁶.

Edward Lea (2 1482 - 13 Sept. ¹⁵4⁴) was a member ef a good Kentish family,
who, after ‹legrees at orford and Cambridge in 1500 and 1504, received a probend
at Lincoln in 1512, and in 1515 his Μ). at Cambridge. He was alse admitted
te the honsehold oonxe, Bp. oi Winchester (Ep. 912 introd.; cf. Epo 9731. ln
July ¹517 he was studying Greek at Louvain, where he quickly made the
acquaintance of Erasmus (Ep. 607. 15.; end Ep. eas shows that he was en
friendly terms with llere. The knowledge that Erasinus was engaged upon
a new edition of tho Nouum lustramentum encenraged Leo to prepare sorno criti-
cisrns, which he put abreed in ins, first as ‘decem conclu-tiones¹ (ef. Ep. 750 ι
aad then in a lsrger hoolr, which was answsred in Ep. ⁸43. 1n the new edition
Erasmus teolr some notice of Lee¹s remarks, by introducing into the notes
passages to controvcrt them ; but hee was net satisfied, end on Erasmua' return
froin Basle a querrel, perhaps accentuated hy persensi antipathy, brehe out
between them. Lees charge was that Erasmus had neglected his critieisnis
after having invited thern; and he proceeded to attach the lif->aum znsefflmcnmw
ruore persistently. Apologies were put ont on both sides, Erasmus being rein>
forced hy aundry pamphlets, including a volume of Epistulae „tadilonem mmm
,Em in which his English and German friends combined to ebuso Lee with
little restraint ef dccency. Lee⁴s enaet seems ιο have heen ovolsed, not by the
hoetility of erthedery, but by a desire to win fame. 0n Erasmus* side the
petulanee nith which he usually resented public ci-iticisin was cnhauced hy the
consideration that his assailant was a man much younger than himself and
almost unknown. After being carried ιο absurd lengths the matter ended in
¹520. Eoe returned ιο England, te become κομι Almoner in 1523, and ιο be
eatrusted with embassies in following years to Eerdinend, the Emperor, and
the Pepe. Henry, finding him a convenient instrument, erowncd hia prefer-
nient with theArchbishepric of Yorlr in ¹53¹, and he continued ιο serve the
Kiug, though net always without suspicion, in creating a church of England
seperate from Reme hut hostile to the Reformers. Aschain, in his heims, writes
to, and of, hee with affection.

See DNB. Α. mudau, Erannos-Araccaeis dea Naum* Tuan, pp. sedas, gives
a detailed account of the controversy; and the case foi· Les is stated by J. s.
Brewer, ΕΜΔ-ιιι senates, 1³81, pp. 373-⁶-]

ERASMVS LEO SVO S. D.

NON licuit vti tuis annotationibus, quod ea pars non possit extor-
quen‘ e manibus scriptoris. Mitto ad te libellum Fabri nouum; in

764.3.Aemylii]cf.Epp.13⁵.1n.,719r Eupsetuin] ef. Ep. soe. Bs-

9. lenaei-ica] lt is possible that ιι. Budeo] ef. Ep. 7⁶7.
Erasmus had not yet seen the ιιι 7652,scriptoris]providedhym-laid,
sanitate tuendo (Ep. sno. 15 n.); bnt the ef. πω). αα notationes Lei, no. r, ΕΒ. ix.
reference is more probably ιο the rasa, iser.
Meti-odas pemat- (Ep. 735.17 n.). libellum] ef. Ep. 7⁶⁶. 22.

lo

