THE COPENHAGEN MANUSCRIPT 633

which eonsist of elight polishings of phraae and also of substitutions
of periphrases for proper names, publication of which would be likely
to cause offence. But it is noticeahle that two of the corrections
made have been further altered before printing in H. In another,
f. 1 96, a secretary has copied into the text a word written by Erasmus
lu the margin. Butinthe third, f. x 80, the treatment is more thorough.
There are a few corrections, mostly marginal, by Erasmus, which
are probably of the time of first writing. But another hand, working
with a finer pen, has improved the writing throughout the page tu
make it ruore legible; not introducing any changes, however, except
in the alteration of -e to -ae by addition cf the cedilla. It is hardly
possible from ite character that this should be tha work of Erasmus.
It is probably howevery contemporary, and may therefore be attributed
to a secretary preparing the document for copying.

The most interesting case of revision is in ff. 207-220, which con-
tain the letters οἱ the years 1530-1. These have been clearly and
definitely revieed by Erasmus, with a finer pen and darker ink which
is easily distinguishable. Beyond f. 220y though the letters are still
of the same period and are printed in the same volume, J, the revision
ceases. Of one of these letters, f. 217, the letter actually sent still
survives; and by comparison of the texts it is clear that Erasmus’
corrections were not made for reproduction in the letter sent. There
can therefore he no doubt that the corrections in the whole series
were made somewhat later, with a view to the publication of the
lettere in J. It is to be notieedy however, that, as with H, the corv
rectione made by Erasmus on these leaves are by no means all those
that appear in J, Besides Erasmus’ revision there are also two
cases, ff. κως-ιο, where improvement of the writing like that noticed
on f. 180 has taken place.

Except in one case there is no sign that any part of the manuscript
was ever used for printing. The exception is the first letter in the
collection (f. 160)q which is the final one in the De [rw-itare (Μ). It
is not, however, really a lettery but is of the nature ofa preface 3 so
that no fair copy uf it would be needed for dispatch. It is mureover
well and clearly written: and so it is not surprising that it should
exhibit the familiar red chalk marks with which printers used to
record on copy the divisions and numbers of pages—in this case those
of M. But the chalk marks occur nowhere else, either among the
compositions or the letters; and the manuscript as a whole is clean
and free from solds or marks of use. It is clear therefore that it was
not used for the press- The improvement noted above in various
letters may accordingly be attributed to a preparation uf the text
for copying with a view to use in the press; and was perhaps done
by one secretary for the guidanee of another.

The work of secretaries is also shown in the names of persons
addressed which are prefixed hy them to some of the letters; by the
enti-ies ⁶ Transcripta ¹ (ff. 1 81 and 232) and ⁴ Transcriptae sunt onmes’
(fi 201); and by vertical lines drawn down the page in some cases,
clearly conveying the same signification. In a few places too they
have underlined words which they found difficult to read ; and on
one page (f. 218) au underljning pen seems to have drawn Erasmus*
attention tu two cases oi repetition, which he subsequently corrected.

