xxix

187Δ. Fnom JULms 11.

Vatichn Arehives, Reg. Later. 1174, s 3¹³5 νο, Rome.
ΕΗΒ. xxv. 124. 4 Januizry 150}-

[ror the document that follows l sm indehted to Dr. Brem, Direcior es the
Dutch Hister-ieal institute st Rome, who has very kindiy placed it at my disposal,
1t was discovered by him in the course or his systematic researches ior the
Anhe'uulin *in luzum md an abstracti 01¹ it is given in his second volume, 1909,
no ¹877- 1ts main interest is thet it hrings to light a transsction in Erssmus‘
life or which hitherto nothing hus hoen known. The dispensation confers upon
him the pcwerto hold hcnciices or certain kinds ; and in form it closely resemble-
a similar hrief which he received from Leo x in 1517 (Ep. 5¹8}— As to the pur-
pose ior which it wes obtained, at first sight s ciue seems tc he offered hy a letter
of Erasmus tc Sei-vetius st seeyn in 1505; in which he speaks or Δ spes istic non
contemnendae ³, which might heve heen expected to deter him srcm going to
England (Ep. 185. 127). But Dr. Bmm points out that the reference tc orho le
Blsnc end uttchcni Fieschi, pspal legstes in Engiand in 1237 and raes, nnd the
dispensetion troni their constitutions (Willcins i. ⁶⁴9 seq., ii. i seq.)-evidantly
those requiring residencc-iinplies ccnolusiveiy thst the patronege expected hy
Erasmus wss Englieh; and this is horne out hy the facts. 1n the summer
orauturnn cf 1505 he came to Englsnd in quest of endownient (n. 1204} and
was there ror merc then a year. The greater pert of thet time he spent in
hondon, in close intimacy with eelettap. 3⁵4 intrem> and with other ecclesiastice
and noblemen; and in April 1505 he mentione a promise of e benefice from
uenry vu (Ep. ¹89> za). ιι mey therefore he presumed that cn arrival in
England he had at once set on rect negotiatione st Rome to enshle him to enjoy
en English living; and that this letter is the answer. it ie even poseihle thet
he may have hoen helped in the matter hy Ammonius snd Sylvester ‹sigliq who
afterwards secured ror hini the dispensetion froin hee x [see Ep. ⁴⁴7 introd. ,.
Beth were in England st the time (Ep. ωε ιιιικοὼ, end Ammoniushsd induential
friends st Julius' court (Ep. aeg. 25-32>, But nenry‘s promise wae not rulfilled;
and thus the disponsatien was or no avail to Erasmus until 1512 (Ep. 255 introd,).

The letter eleo ccntrihutee something tc the question of Erasmuel parentagei
The ststement thet his father wss sn unmerried laynisn (colmiae) seems to dis-
pose or the legend thet he was the son of a priest, But it is considershly
discounted hy the lsngusge used about hiri. in Ep, ⁵17· ms, where his desertus
nataliam is said tc consiet in being a illicite ct, te timet, inceste domitumque coion
omum a description which suggests that he may in the interval have learnt
incre shout the circumstances os his hirth; while, ee Vischer notes, it alec
implies some uncertainty remaining in his mind as to the date when hie rather
took orders.

There cen he nc question as te the authenticity or this document; for it
occure in one or the registers in which letters were regularly entered hy the popel
secretsries before dispstch. [n this csse the copy was mede csrelesely and with
seme shhreviaticns os ici-mulos hy ¹etc.· ‘rhe first of these 1 have empliiied from
comparison with Ep. με ς the last three omit stereotyped forms. 1 heve alsc in
efew places taken the liherty of writing c for ι ιο svcid such forme ss loto cr
simpliiittr. Por permissicn tc reprint from Emi„ ism ohliged to Dr. R. L. Poole.]

IVLIVS &CL DILBCTO FILIO DESIDERIO ERASMO, CANONICO

limNASTERn DE STEYN IN HOLLANDIA, ORDINIS SANC'H
AVGVSTINI, TRAIETENSIS DIOCESIS‚ SALVTEM QG.

Rammius zellus, vitc ac morum honestas, aliaque laudabillia
probitatis et virtutum merita, super quibus apud nos fidedigno
commendaris testimonio, nos inducunt vt be specialibus fauoribus
et graciis prosequamur. Hine eet quod nos volentes te, qui, vt

asseris, deffectum natalium pateris5 de soluto genitus et vidua, 5
*htux (⁵

