136 LETTERS OF ERASMUS [15¹7

¹⁵ cum intellexi te hic-adesse, nisi stnfiim aduohssem, arbitrabar me
riou posse compotem voti fieri. Cum primum autem valebo, si per
negocia licebit (postquam ita placeb), ante digressum meum ex hisce
regionibus l). T. Louauii conueniam3 nee enim ipsa hoe tempere
tam bonas horas hue veniendo perdere debet.
πο De Iudaeo vel qui sub eius tam infami et perditio nomine eum
‹loetissimo quoque ai: optimo viro congredi nudent, solum ex infamia
famam sihi aucupantes, nil melius existimo quam illos omittere cum
incircumcisa ab omni bono opere mente, el: in tenebris suis ignotos
delitescere. Ex motu tactuque rei foetide nil uisi foetor elici potest.
25 Litel-as Do. Τ. ad Maguntinm et Pyrckhaimel· transmittam⁴ Valeat
dl'u feliciter Do. T R. ad commodum et incrementum omnium
studiorum.
Antuuerpiiie, dl'e duodecima nouembris. Ax. luamxwl. E. R. D. T.

710. 'ro Dmfflxlco GRIMANL

Paraphrnsis :id Romanos Ρ. (2³²). Louvain.
liond. xxix. 72 (73): LE. vii. 771. 13 November ¹517-

[Ernsnius‘ paraphrases en the separate honus ns the ziew 'restnnient may he
regarded as n natural sequence er his work upon ihe text. Parsphrase was to
him *a kind of commeninry’(1.0nd. xxiii. ες LB. ⁶⁵⁰, 7⁶3 ηε and the great
success of the intreduntory portinns oi the Nouum 1mhumentum,the Feminis
nrnl the nario ieme meatem-ne (Ep. 745)-a success whieh was douhtless personally
manifested to Μαι herere the long series of independent editions begins-sng-
nested tu liirn the idea of an exposition nt the New restaurent in a popular
ferm. xri this he would he free on tiis one hnnd froin the restricti-ms or
n literni translation nuel, na lie had previously carried oui, and on the ether
from {lle severities os a aelmiarly commentas-y, whieli he hsd discovered tn he
lesa eaay to hirn than paraphrase (Ep. 755) = as indeed it was alien toliis genius.
lle hegen with the Epintle to the Romans: and although sti-iet ortlmdoxy
murmured, the hook was on the whole so well received (ef. Ep. 937] that he
was eneenraged to proeeed through the various Episties, first oi St. Paul,
and then os the otiiordpnstles⁴ By 1521 these were oonnpleted; and then at
the request of Schinner (Ep. 447. seen.) he turned to the Goapeis, which he
finished in ιδῃ. The Acts followed in 1524; and thus the whole iiew
Testament was paraphrased with the eroeptinn of the Revelation, to wliieh
in this wey lie did not venture to lay iiis hand.

'rho fortunes of the work were never in doum. Besidee the numerous
editions puhlished hy Erohen, the paraphrases were reprinted, either wholly
erin part, in πωπω, Germany, Switzerland, the Netherlauds and Spain. By
7523 Leo ,ind lind trnnsiated those en the Epiatles inte German; and in
153⁰ a German translation appeared oi the Gospels and Epistles. or the
Parhphrase on St. Matthew a Boliemian version earne out in 1542; and a Prench
version ns the Epistles in ¹543- Their success in Eugland was even nadre
striking. Paris ef Erasinus* translation of the Now Testament had heen turned
inte English in 1538 and iseo. 1n ¹5⁴³ with the support anueen Katherine
Parr n number ot noholars hended hy Nieholhs Udall underteok a eenapleie

ιθ. D. Τ. E: te H. ipsnE: tu 11. ¹9- debes li. 25. De. Τ. 122
tues H. 28. Ε. R. D. 'n om. H.

 

20, Iudaeo] Psefferkorn. 28. mlum] 'mila fennuia, as it

25. Literas] Epp. 59³ and 694. Ep. stands, isineornplete; ef. Ep. ³3³-140-
722 shows that Ep. 703, und therefore ‘rhe lant word had perhapsdiShppeared
also Ep. 701, were in the packet. st the seot erthe manuscript.

