9¹⁴] FROM LONGOLIUS TO LUCAS 473

ιο study. On Bemhe's return to Rome, he went to Padus, rs April ¹520y and
there the remainder cr liis lise was spent in incrensing poverty,assisted at timeri
hy various friends, oue of whom wne Reginnld Pale. Even a Ciceroniau oration
against the Lutherana failed to bring liins supporty though composed at Papal
request<12r›.E..s. me). It we« iii-st printed in Lo. E„ hut there is ams. copy
at nasle (Α. lx. 72) made ny Boniface Amerhuch at Avignon. 29 Aug* ¹523.

Lcugolius' direct relations with Erasmus began with this letter, which seems
ιο have beon sent by Lucus ω Ruze', pei-hap« as Lcugeliusy former patron, and
was by Ruze communicatsd tc Erasinus (Ep. 935. ll, evidently at a meeting
which followed Epp, 926, 923. Hence the year-date ean he assigned. Α letter
from Longelius tu Budneus, 3¹ Aug, (1520) (lm. E„ f. 75) shows that Erasmus
printed this letter here without eonsultingthe writer. Their meetiug at Lcuvain,
inrtead osprometing cordiulity, cnly acucntuatcd the two points or difference
raised hcre and in Ep. 933. Erasmus- considered his visitur sugmssed in the
trifles of Ciceronianieru; hir patriotic feeling-2, too, hnd douhtless heeu sorne-
whut wcunded by thia letter, und they were further cffeuded hy Lougoliua' per-
sistent adherenoe to Franco-thoush Erasmus still regarded him ns a Brahantiuc
(ci. LB, i. ruina with ll. 89. 90 herz-z, aud had nnt yet formed the opinion that
he was a uullauder (Loud. xxvii. 35, LB. 1284). Their disagreernent continued
nster Longolius' dcutlr; fur though Erasmus wrote er him then with propriety,
it was suspected that the character oc Nesopnuuo in the Ciceronianae was drawn
from Lcugolius (of. Lond. xxiii. roy LB. moes, and iu spite of the appreciative
uriticisui later (LB, i. missos this« provoked violent attacks cn Erasmus in
Lnngolius' defeuce from J, c. Scaliger and Dolet,

See a life by Pele iu ho. E.: a full trsatise hy Th. Simar iu Macen lnce xiiiexv,
¹909⁴¹¹v with an arrangement os the letters, and a hihliogrnphy; und ΒΝ.

Jamer Lucas hud heeu Dean oi· 0rleans since 1510. He warin Rome at this
time, on au emhnssy to secure the ‹iancuizntiun osSt. Francis de Paul. See GC.
viii. 1509 aud Actes de Franccisw. ir. ,ἦε neraldus dedicated to hirn a Memphim,
of Aristctle's Oeconomica, Paris, J. Bai-hier (15¹⁴ or 1515), see Deinruelle iu
lin. d. Bibliolhsslpm xii, 1902, pp* 4356.

Resides the series of Erasmus· Efficietne thie letter was included with Ep. 9³5
in au edition οἰ Longolius' wei-ks, Basie, J. Valder, Sept. 1533 (a), at the end of
the fifth hook of letters (p. 342). Βιιι as the readings ns a iu both cases agree
with those ct Η, except in one trifling omission (l. 48), it was presumahly taken
freni that source, aud may follow 11 among the sigla]

CHRISTOPHORVS Loscouvs ΙΑοοΒο ΙΝΟΑΕ, DEcANo
AVRELIANENSI, S.

Nvuqvlm nobis deerit scribendi argumentum, si (vt te olim
monui) mutuis id interrogationibus excitemus: quo nomine scripsi
ad te haud ite pridem, mihi adeo gratum forey si plenius ex te
intelligerem eur Princeps vester Ernsmum Budaeo praetulerit,
Germanum Gallo, exterum ciui, ignotum familiari, Nan] quod5
ad eruditionem pertinet, non video qua in re Budaeus Erasmo cedat,
siue humaniores siue Christiano dignas homine literas aestimare
libeat. Quod vero ad dicendi facultatem pertinet, parem, mea
seutentia, isi tam diuerso dicendi genere laudem merentur. Beati&¹
sima in ambobufl et rerum eh verborum eopia 3 sed ita vt alter latius xo
spacietur, alter angustiore quidem alueo verum altiore ingentem
aquarum vim trahat. Fluit ille plenior, hie fertur limpidior. In
Budaeo videor mihi agnoscere plus neruorum, &inguinisy spiritus;

1. sane uon pase nubis add. F. si E: nisi F. 3. haud itu mid. F.
⁵- exterum F, cſs 1. 86 z externum Ε. 6Δ eruditionem F: conditionem E.
ιο. latius E: altius N. ιι, exspatiatur F. 12. limpidior E: rapidior F.

⁴- praetulerit] For nppoiutmentto the Collega de Franco; Epp. 522, 896- 90 n.

