632 APPENDIX XIII

their historical valuez for in that case we might fairly expect to find
them carefully sorted out and the letters especially placed in chrono-
logical order. It seems more as though it were a congeries brought
together almost haphazard by some one desimus of gathen'ng and yet
hardly heeding what he gathered : ae for instance Lamhert Oomannus,
Erasmus' last secretary, might have laid his hands hastily on such
papers as he could find after his master’s death. For this suggestion
there is some confirmation in the fact that, notwithstanding what
has been said, there is a certain degree of arrangement about the
papers. In the Eccleszasres and other compositione the displacement
which occurs is not of single sheets but, as has been shown above,
of gronps; and again among the letters there is some natural group-
ing. Thus the three letters* which are printed in the De Prae-
paratione, 1534(L), occur together at the beginning; aud of the 18
which appear in the Epistozae Florida& 1531 (J), 17 are found in a
rontinuous series, which at timos follows very closely the order 111
which they are printed in the book. This orderly and yet disordered
arrangement is just what might he expected 111 a collection hurriedly
gathered during the necessaiy dispositions which follow death ; aud
it is not difficult to suppose that the pape-rs may subsequently have
passed from hand to hand without much scrutiny until they reached
the pretet-tion of the Copenhagen Library.

The collection has considerable value in the light that it throws
on Erasmus* practice in the writing and preservation os his corre-
spondence. All the letters are rough drafts, not a single one having
been actually dispatchcd, and a few being back to back on the same
sheet. There is thus proot' of a fact tor which there is no other
direct evidence, that Erasmus in his later years usually wrote rough
drafts of his letters, and that these were copied fair by his secretaries
sor dispatch. A number of fair copies written by secreta-ries are of
course in existence ς but except for those under consideration here no
rough drafts are known. This later practice is in direct contrast to
that of the period 1516ῐέ1, which is represented hy the Deventer
Letter-hook (App. 8), when he commonly wrote his letters ior dispatch
and his secretaries copied them ior preservation.

The letters bear various marks of revision, besides the corrections
naturally made at the time of first writing. Two of the letters of
¹5²4 have been corrected. One, f. 243, was unquestionably revised
by Erasmus. but as in one place there are two divergences from the
(lpus Epistolarum, 1529 (H), the edition in which it was first printed,
it seems doubtful whether the corrections were made with a view to
its publication there. More probably they were made a few years
earlier, and subsequently improved at the time of printing. The
other letter of 1524, fi 239, presents difficulties. There are six cor-
rections by a contemporary hand, which might be Erasmus', lmit
might equally well be that of his secretary. Here again the cor-
rections cannot have been made with a view to H, for of the numerous
changes made there none that are really imponant are found in
these six. So that here too we may attribute them to a revision
at an earlier time.

Three letters of 1528 show revision, of a different kind in each
case. In onev f. 198y Erasmus is clearly the author of the changes,

