873] ΤΟ HENRY BEMYNG 411

vocabis inhumanum qui illinon rescribam : imo si coner hic omnibus
satisfacere, ne decem quidem notari-i sufficerent, vt preterea nihil
agam. Imo eum haec scriberem, reieci Hispanos quosdam odiose,
pertinaciter meum colloquium expetentes; quos scio ob hoe infensos
foi-e, vt est gentis ingenium. Ita dum humanus esse studeo, cogor ¹0
esse pamm humanm. Bene vale, Heni-ine charissime.

Louanii. xvi. Cal. Nouembr.

874. To HELu's Eonmvs.

Eobam· Hodoeporicon ib. c=. Louvain.
0¹. p. 84: 0⁷. p. 131: Loud.1xx. 6.- LB. 476. ¹9 October 1518.

[thcnns enci (6 Jan. ηδε - ⁴ 0ct. 154⁰) was horn or poor parente at Ham«-
haunan, near Fraukanherg in nesse fle was christened after a eompanion or
et. Bonifaee, hui-led at Erfurt and honoured throughout Thuringia, and later he
prefixed tne name Helius aa having been horn on a Sunolay. After attending
the Latin sehools of Gemnnden (till 1502 ann ffimkenbem, he inatriculated at
fflurt inlrsn4 and was na„ 150⁶. sehoolninster at St. aeveroe xsor& M.A.1509
Fniliug of support he lert Erfurt and found patronage from „lon of Doheneelr, Bp⁴
ος Pomerania, who in 1513 eent him tothe ιιιιῑνεηηῑεεοεἙιεῃιιῑηη-(,ιι-ιι]ε»οᾱι-,ι
cnd Leipzig. Since 1506 ha had hesn publishing numerous verses ; hut now the
appearance of his Heroides (Ep. 871. η Π.) ohteined him widespread recognition
aa a poet. xn 1517 he was appointed to a classiesl lectmeship at nrfnrt, and for
a few years lie was the head ora circle or young A poete ¹, whounited in rendering
homage first to Erasmus and then to Luther. Many of his friends‚1‚ang‚ Draco.
Jonce, wera prepared to follow Lnther (ψ, but frorn the sohisrn that threatened
nohanns recoiled. 'rhe University deelinee rapidly. and he found nimeelralniost
alone. After vain efforts to support himself hy studying medicine he rnoved to
Nuremherg in ’με to teacn. ne was recalled to Erfurt 15334, hut then until
nis death he wes Professor of ffistory at Marbulg.

'nie admiration wnich he felt sor Erasinus on the occasion of this visit (p. ⁴⁰5
cooled under the first attraction towards Luther; and the exchange or letters
between thern in 153¹ led to no real revival of aniity⁴ ιιι his later life he pro-
duced a nuniher of verse-translations, the hest known being those of Theocritus
(¹531) and the niad (ψῃ).

See ΕΗΕ. ond a life υς c. Kraose, 1879, witn a bibliography.]

ERASMVS ROTERODAMVS EOBANO HESFO SVO S. D.

Iul arbitrabar mihi probe cognitam Germaniam. et quiequid
esset insignium ingeniorum peruestigaturn. Adamabam ingenium
Beati Renani ς exoseulabar indolem Philippi Melanchtonis ; suspicie-
bam Capnionis maiestatem; capiebar Hutteni daeliciis. Et ecee
de repente Hessus, quod antehac in singulis vel amabam vel mirabar, 5
Vnus vniuersum exhibuit. Quid enim aliud Heroides tuae quam

874. 3. mienani 0². Melanthonis γι Melanchthonis 0.

secondy dated 1515, 1 have not seen; (Bodlznoucew.245).whieh appeared
but the third is dedicated by hino, after he had become Preaeher at St.
¹³ feo. 151⁶. to Jod. Trutfetter of naug’s in wiirzburg. At the present
Eiaenach, whom ne describes as his time he was still perhaps at Erfurt.
macher. There is a fourth volume, In 1519 Oeeolampadius flought hin
also published by ΜΒΙεῑ, and contain- acquaintance (SE. ²09)-

iug only Tentorin‘ wei-liy without date , 573. ε. Hispanos] cs. Ep. 545. ιε.

