iv PREFACE

in Holland to Dr. Molhuysen, Dr. Muller and Dr. van Rijn;

in Italy to Dr. Brom of the Dutch Historicsl School at Rome.
and to Count Ugo Balzaui;

in Spain to Sr. Menendez y Pelayo (†) and Professor Bouilla
y San Maron:

in Switzerland to Dr. Bernoulli and Dr. Schiess3

iu America to Professor J. L Ger-ig of columbis Univemity
and Professor preserved Smith of Amhersb3

and in this country to ΜΓ, Loveday of Williamscote, Dr. See-
bohm (†), and Professor W. H. Woodward.

The three whom we mour-n as dead need no memorial here;
their names are known far and wide. M. Vander Haeghen ss
a librarian and bihliographer. Dr. Seebohm as a historiar] and
owner of books gave prompt help and eneouragemenr, to this
work at its fimt beginning, nearly twenty years ago. I delight
to count them as masters and to remember how much Ι have
owed to them at exery stage. Of him whom his countrymen
affectionalely call ‘Don Mareeliuo‘ Ι cannot even say ‘Vidi
tsntum¹; but the fragrance ot* the welcome extended by his
letters, written in illness, will not fade. I should like to be
able to render to this trio of famous scholars the tribute they
would most have valued, of hansling ou to those that come
after the spirit of high endeavour and ample generosity that
eharaeterized all their work.

With this volume we are praetieally finished with the two
Deventer manuscripts. Ten years have elapsed, almost to the
day, since they first entered the Bodleian: and they are now on
the point of returning to their northern Athenaeum. All seholars
know how great is the advantage of having originals at hand.
when printing: but only we who have turned m these manu-
scripts again and again can he consciens of the numerous
occasions on which their presence here has made it possible
to advance nearer to the standards of accurate reproduetion
which such work as this requires. Our most grateful thanks
are due to Dr. van Slee and the Curators of the Deventer
Lihrary for the far-sighted patience with which they have
acquieeeed in this long delay. The assistance they have
rendered us is incomparable.

P. S. ALLEN.
23 MERTON S'rrmm, Oxrosu.
26 March 1913.

