750] To MARTlN LYPSIUS 1h5

(text being clearly that os the letter as zetually sent. For the ocmsionnl variatione
ot spelling 1 have given precedonce to Lypsius. There is another copy by
Lypeiue in the eodcx Horawitzian us, with some variations (Herewitz v, p. 17 n.) ;
but the llis. lies eluded my inquiries.

A long »argument' by him in o leaves no doubt as to the circumstances undar
which the letter was written, and the pers-on to whorn it was addresaed ; though
Epp. 8⁴3 and ⁸97 are really ample evidence to identify M. B. here with Martinus
Bruxellensie, and the ⁴syeephantic' rritio with Lee jp. cog).

Lypsius· argument runs as follows ι ‘nomino Ersnmo, insigni theologo, Louanii
in loannis Paludani Rhetoris aedibus commorante, quidam e spinosorum
theologietarnni numero argutulus satin lcuius ob reuerentiam nonon reticeo)
nonnullis ex variis Eraezui opusculis locis aagregutis libellum contra ea contexuit 3
quern execripturn F. Martinus Bruxell<ensis>‚ canonicus regularis, diaconii offi-
cium in academia vallis Sancti Martini administrans, Eraemiani nominisvbioue
defensor, illi transmisit,iungens epistolam (cuius penes vnurn Emanium exemplar
remansit) qua paucis praemissis etiam quae theologus ille in subscriptam Eraemi
annotationem effutierat indicauit, Adnitebatur enini totis neruis vt lapsum
Magistri Sententiarum, vbi traducendi verbo abutitur, excurrant: ao callidis dis-
ceptationibus praedictum diaconum Murtinum ferme induxerat vt existimaret
Erasmum nilse Sententiarum Magistrum taxasse. Porro vbi Emensus libellurn
nocepit, disiunctis quaternionibus singulos singulis amiculis nircum en legendos
tradidit. Denique deliberatione habita, vt cst miro candore praeditus, neniis
theologi illius spretis pium freti-is illins adectnni non despexit. Nam epistolam
huic annotationi annexam per D.Vrbanuin, diui Petri canonicum, rqui etiam
praelibatilibelli portitor ruit» ipsi transmisit. ls enini, fratris buius cognatus or
vous e famulia Pnludane domus. aptus negocii huius executor visus est)

*rho ‘libellus‘ with which Erasmus here deals is probably the ‘decem
conclusionesy of Ep. 843. ¹7 ἐς. Ep. 755· ι) with which the condiet with
Lee began. Π Lypeiuev memory ie accurate in stating that Leeus notes were
composed while Erasmus was with Paludanus, thia letter ‚night he placed as
early as Sept, 1517 (cf. Ep. 551- roseq.;. But it is probably not iar distent in time
from Ep. 765, in which Erasinus declines to make use or Lee‘s notes; and l
therefore place it conjecturally in Jan. ¹5¹⁸>

llartin Lypsiue or Lipsius (c. 2492—23 March 1555] or Brussels, after being
at sorne times pupil ol Nieholas esHertegenbosch ‹florawitz v. p, re5y,was placed
by his rather in Val St. nertin, a house of Austin canons at Louvain, ct 1508
(ibid. 91 <151⁰ r cr. Ep. 304< 161 n.>); and nrade his profession there in 1520
(ibid. sol, ue seerns to have made Erasmue' acquaintance about this time, and
throughout his lile remained his devoted friend and admirer, Evidenre ol this
arethe collectione he made oi Erasmus· writings in the Codex Horawitzianus
fflorawitz v] entl the Bruesels MS. 4850r7, both perhaps in his autograph.

llis own worlr was mainly theological. He helped Erasmus with the Basle
edition of Augustino, isaeo nordwitz v. ⁸o; EE. ες, and with Amhrese
(norawitz v. eo); and this brought him into permanent connexion with the
Baelo pi-inters. For the Frebens he rev-ised Erasmue¹ Augustino. 1543. The
handsome tribute to his worlr in the pretace to its vol, i states that he had been
studying Augustino for 20 years, and that he had completed all except vol. x, in
which lie had been intermpted hythe Gueldrian invasion ot ltrabnnt<in ι5μ);
being driven by thie to take refuge in the abbey of Neumoustier, near nuy les.
bis prersce to Chromatius, in Η, Petri‘s mirporpraavmev, 1550f. ln ¹547 he
couti-ibuted to the Froben Symmachus, Sept. 1549ch lusti Liplepistolarlem decades
aiio,Hai⁴derwyl<,r⁶21,p.roo>; and he revised ror them Erasmus· Hilary in
March 1550. A revision or Erasmus· Cyprinn proposed in ¹543 ¹ibid. p. 96) carne
to nothing. llis worlr on vol. x oiAuguetine was finished wrth the aid of two
pupilsy John coster and John Vlirnmer, hoth afterwards Priore olVal St. Martio,
and appeared in the Froben edition or ¹5⁶9 andin that publia-hed hy Plantin for>
the theologisns ol houvain in 157a7 ; see also Vlimrner¹s prelace to hie edition
oi Augustine’s semones, Louvain, Η. Wellaeusy 156⁴ (migne xi. 377). Sereert
states tliat Plantin printed an edition by hin-i ol John enatos of Breohvs Latin
grammon and gives nn epitaph which credits him with worlr on lllacrohius.

At intervals during his later years he was werden or a nnnnery at Lens
ste. croix, near Huy. He was there in (1531) (Besle MS. ΚΑ, c. lv. 5v vol. i,
t ιη νηε probably too in isso-eo, when he wrote two letters to Bouiraoe
Amorhech, one *ex Gallicana Brabantia', about a present or eo florius made
tc him hy Erasmus in ¹53⁶ (Basle MSS. <J⁴ 11, eo, 29⁴7& Sebeti Epist. r, m.

